---
title: "Abstraction Vs Code Duplication"
slug: "abstraction-vs-code-duplication"
date: 
draft: true
---
In the realm of software development, the concept of code duplication often
sparks heated debates. While some advocate for a strict "Don't Repeat
Yourself" (DRY) principle, others argue that there are instances where keeping
duplicated code can be a pragmatic solution. This article delves into the
nuances of code duplication, exploring its potential drawbacks and the
circumstances where it might be a justifiable strategy.

**Code Duplication: A Double-Edged Sword**

Code duplication occurs when the same piece of code appears in multiple
locations within a software project. While it may seem like a harmless
practice, code duplication can introduce a host of problems that hinder the
long-term maintainability and scalability of software applications.

One of the primary concerns associated with code duplication is the increased
maintenance burden it imposes. When a change needs to be made to the
duplicated code, it must be applied in every instance, raising the risk of
introducing bugs and inconsistencies. This can lead to a tangled web of
interdependencies that make future modifications increasingly difficult.

Another significant drawback of code duplication is its impact on code
readability. When developers encounter duplicated code, they must decipher
whether the different instances represent intentional variations or unintended
duplications. This can be particularly challenging for new team members
unfamiliar with the codebase, making it harder to grasp the overall structure
and functionality of the application.

Moreover, code duplication can contribute to increased codebase complexity.
The presence of redundant code can obscure the underlying logic and
relationships between components, making it more difficult to understand and
modify the codebase effectively. This complexity can hinder development
efforts and prolong the time required to implement new features or fix bugs.

**When to Embrace Code Duplication**

Despite its potential drawbacks, there are situations where keeping duplicated
code might be a justifiable strategy. In the early stages of development, when
the overall design and requirements are still evolving, prematurely
refactoring duplicated code can lead to unnecessary complexity and wasted
effort.

Similarly, when the duplicated code is small, localised, and unlikely to
change frequently, it might be more pragmatic to keep it separate until a more
appropriate abstraction emerges. This approach can help maintain a balance
between development progress and code maintainability.

**Refactoring: Striking the Right Balance**

The decision to refactor duplicated code should not be taken lightly. It
requires careful consideration of factors such as the size and frequency of
changes, the potential for future modifications, and the overall impact on the
codebase.

When refactoring is deemed necessary, it is crucial to employ appropriate
techniques and best practices. Extracting methods, creating classes, and
utilising design patterns can effectively encapsulate duplicated code and
promote code reuse. Additionally, refactoring tools can automate repetitive
tasks and help maintain code integrity during the process.

**Embracing Pragmatism and Abstraction**

Code duplication, while generally considered a bad practice, should not be
viewed as an absolute evil. In certain circumstances, it can serve as a
temporary solution while developers grapple with evolving requirements and
abstractions. However, it is essential to remain vigilant against code
duplication and proactively address it when it becomes a hindrance to
maintainability and scalability.

By cultivating a culture of code cleanliness and adopting a pragmatic approach
to refactoring, software developers can strike a balance between efficiency
and long-term maintainability, ensuring that their code remains a valuable
asset for years to come.

