---
title: "Why YOU Should Blog Too!"
slug: "why-you-should-blog-too"
date: 2023-03-30T11:21:00.000Z
draft: false
featured_image: "why-you-should-blog-too-1.jpg"
tags: ["blogging", "writing", "career", "personal-branding"]
categories: ["Career and Writing"]
description: "A post about the benefits of blogging for personal and professional growth."
---
{{< figure src="why-you-should-blog-too-1.jpg" alt="white printer paper beside silver macbook" caption="Photo by [Markus Winkler](https://unsplash.com/@markuswinkler) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com)" >}}

When I first thought about blogging it was daunting. Even though I liked the
idea of blogging, I didn’t know why I should blog. What was I going to add to
the world when all I know comes from reading other’s books and blogs? I had no
reason to write about topics that are already written about extensively by
experts in that area. I didn’t think I knew enough contribute.

Then I found a reason – to document my own learnings. It was supposed to be my
notebook. I started to document things I had learnt and things I was learning
at that moment. It was a ‘blog’ in the sense that it was on the web. Few of
the ‘notes’, I felt, were better than the others. I shared them with few
friends. They liked it and encouraged me to start a ‘blog’. Even though I was
not sure they convinced me that there was nothing to lose. That’s how I
started to write.

Blogging isn’t for everyone. Tons of amazing developers don’t have blogs or
personal websites at all. I write because it’s fun for me and it helps me
organize my thoughts.

This post is for anyone who is still thinking why they should start blogging.

### Share Your Unique Experience

Even though a particular technology or topic may have been covered extensively
by others, you likely have your own unique experiences and insights to bring
to the conversation. Maybe you’ve used a particular technology in a novel way,
or have encountered challenges that others haven’t. By sharing your own
experience, you can add a valuable perspective to the conversation and offer
new insights to your readers.

### Learn More

Starting a tech blog can also be a great way to learn more about technology.
As you research and write about different topics, you’ll inevitably come
across new information and insights that you may not have otherwise
discovered. Plus, by interacting with your readers and other tech enthusiasts
online, you can learn even more about the latest trends and developments.

### Provide a Different Format

While there may be many articles, books, or video tutorials on a particular
technology or topic, not everyone may want to consume information in those
formats. Writing a blog post can provide a quick and easy-to-digest summary or
guide to a particular technology. Additionally, you can provide your own
unique voice and style to make the information more accessible to your
readers.

### Reach a Different Audience

While established tech bloggers may have a loyal following of readers, there
are likely still many people who are interested in the topic but haven’t yet
found a resource that speaks to them. By writing a blog post on the topic, you
can reach a new and different audience who may not have been exposed to the
information before.

### Update Information

Technology is constantly changing and evolving. Even if a topic has been
covered extensively in the past, there may be new updates, features, or
security vulnerabilities that need to be addressed. By writing about these
updates, you can provide valuable and up-to-date information to your readers.

### Connect with Like-Minded People

Starting a blog can also help you connect with like-minded people from all
over the world. By sharing your thoughts and insights online, you can engage
with other tech enthusiasts and build a community of people who share your
passion for technology. This can lead to new friendships, collaborations, and
even business opportunities.

### Establish Yourself as an Expert

Writing about a particular technology or topic consistently can help you
establish yourself as an expert in that field. This can be valuable for your
career, as it can help to establish you as a thought leader in your industry
or area of expertise. Additionally, by building a following of readers who are
interested in your content, you may be able to leverage this following for
other opportunities, such as speaking engagements, consulting work, or job
offers.

### Have Fun!

Finally, starting a blog should be fun! It’s a great way to share your
interests and connect with others who share your passions. Plus, there’s
something uniquely satisfying about creating content and putting it out into
the world for others to enjoy.

While my blog is mostly tech, the benefits of blogging apply to any niche or
topic. Blogging is a versatile medium that can be used to share your
knowledge, connect with like-minded individuals, and build your personal
brand, regardless of the subject matter.

I encourage you to be the new blogger to explore different topics and niches
that interest you. Whether it’s fashion, cooking, travel, or personal
development, there’s an audience out there for every type of content. By
starting a blog and sharing your unique perspectives and experiences, you can
create valuable content that resonates with your audience.

{{< newsletter type="simple" >}}
